ELLIOTT 903 MUSIC PROGRAMS
 ==========================

The following music tapes have been found in various collections:

1.  Terry Froggatt's MUSIC PROGRAM 22/2/72 and CAROLS 22/12/71
    distributed as a single tape containing a binary of the program
    which autotriggers loading and single tape.  Input music is
    written in a textual notation, read in and played out
    directly. There is a source tape for the program in the file
    TJF_MUSIC.900.

2.  Two "reverse compilations" of a another music program ("MUSIC")
    have been found called MUSICAB.900 and MUSICDG.900.  Music can
    be read in either as a textual score for translation to
    numerical form or as sequence of pairs of numbers suitable for
    playing.

3.  MAESTRO, a program issued by Queen Elizabeth School mentioned in
    documentation, but no tapes have been found for the program,
    but one music tape ha been found.

4.  An ALGOL program - MUSICSRC - "Music Writing Program" which reads
    in a textual notation and emits a numerical translation.

4.  A tape of music in the numerical format expected by MUSIC,
    comprising Handel's "Arrival of the Queen of Sheba",
    Mendelssohn's "Wedding March" from a Midsummers Night Dream and
    Rimsky-Korsakov's "Flight of the Bumble Bee". The data is in
    numerical format.

5.  A tape labelled "SHEBA (Half Speed") containing a numerical form
    of "The Arrival of The Queen of Sheba" that plays at half speed
    with (2).  It appears to be the same as the version in 4) but
    with the note durations doubled.

6.  A tape labelled "THE ENTERTAINER" that plays a badly out of tune
    version of Joplin's "The Entertainer" with (2).  It is in
    numerical form.

7.  A tape of binary input to MAESTRO labelled as containing "When All
     The Saints" and "Cockles and Mussels".

8.  A tape labelled "TUNES (VARIOUS), FOR OLD 8K ONLY" from Terry
    Froggatt's "Pontefract" paper tape collection, consisting of a
    player and a set of tunes - "Men of Harlech", "God Save The
    Queen", "Old Lang Syne", "Ash Grove", "Land of my Fathers",
    "Land Lubbers Lying Down Below".

9.  A tape labelled "RLB MUSIC, FOR ON-LINE COMPOSING VIA T/t" from
    Terry Froggatt's "Pontefract" paper tape collection, along with
    corresponding Algol and SIR sources, and sample tunes: "The
    Sting", "We Shall Overcome", "What Have They Done to the
    Rain?", "Fascinating Rhythm", "White Christmas", "Hark the
    Herald Angels Sing", "Away in a Manger" and "Once in Royal
    David's City".


The various music generating programs and the files of music show
considerable inconsistency in how notes are played.

I have written my own music program (see "AJH_MUSIC PROGRAM") which is
intended to be able to play as many of the acquired tunes as possible
as tunefully as possible.  The program uses an extended version of the
input notation for the Froggat (TJF) music program as this is the most
compact.  A suite of programs have been written to convert tunes for
the other players to a version which plays on the Herbert music
program.  To the greatest extent possible the converted tunes play as
the same tempo and pitch as in their native player.  To allow each
individual 903 to be "tuned" a small utility program called AJH_TUNEUP
has been written.  Using a stop watch the machine's precise
instruction timing for the player loop can be calculated and from this
a table of in tune "pitch" parameters determined for the specific
machine.  A table in the Herbert music program can be updated with
these parameters to produce a version tuned to the specific machine.
Moreover, if a frequency meter or tuning fork etc is available, the
machine can have the pitch of each note adjusted to be in tune.
(However, the speed of the 903 has been found to vary by as much as
10% between a cold and hot machine so setting for an accurate pitch is
at best approximate.
 

TJF MUSIC PROGRAM 
-----------------

This program can either drive a digital to analogue convertor or
output via the control panel loud speaker (the default).

Entry at 8 reads in a "score" in an input notation described below.
Entry at 9 selects loudspeaker output.  Entry at 10, selects DAC
output.

The input notation consists of pairs of "notes" and "durations"
terminated by a halt code.

A note consists of a letter A-N or a-n, possibly followed by one or
more modifiers, $, + or -.  A duration consists of a symbols 0-@ in
ACD telecode representing valves from 0 to 16. Letters A-G represent
successive notes of an octave in a nominal scale and H-N represent the
next octave above. The letters a-n represent a note a semitone sharper
that the note represented by the capital letter.

The modifier $ sharpens a note by a semitone, + raises it by an
octave, - lowers it by an octave.

The notes are not tied to a specific pitch; rather the relationships
between them are computed mathematically.

Other input symbols below 0 in the ACD telecode (e.g., space, newline,
/) are treated as separators.

Letters M-Z, n-z and symbols above z in ACD telecode translate to
bogus notes and should be avoided.

The player for this music program is a simple loop:

    14 S 10 N 4 N 9 ;-3

S is an interval derived from the nominal pitch of the note: 2^18 /
(pitch*10) and N is a negative number counting the number of cycles to
execute, -(pitch*duration/8).

The sounds produced are close to being in tune, but not perfect.  This
has been tracked down to four factors:

1.  My 903 has different instruction timings than those published in
    the documentation (but within the allowed tolerance).
    shift = 2.8usec vs. nominal 3usec loop takes 93usec vers
    nominal 96usec.

2.  The table of pitches has some minor differences from published
    sources.

3.  An in-exact approximation to 2^12 is used when computing
    semitones.

4.  Rounding errors in the calculation of the value of S.


For comparison with the other music programs, the effective shift
count for each note is:

       Note Shift 
       C     168 
       C$    157 
       D     146 
       D$    138 
       E     128 
       F     118 
       F$    110 
       G     102
       G$     94 
       A      87
       A$     80 
       B      74  
       C^     68 
       C$^    62 
       D^     57 
       D$^    53 
       E^     48 
       F^     43 
       F^$    39 
       G^     35 
       G$^    32 
       A^     28 
       A$^    24 
       B^     21
       C^     18 
       C$^    16 
       D^^    13 
       D$^^   10
       E^^     8 
       F^^     6 
       F$^^    3 
       G^^     1

(Note: the calculated shifts are as above +32, which are then added to
13 8160 to constructed the execute shift instruction.)


903 MUSIC 
=========

No source version of this program has been found. Two reverse
compilation tapes have been found, MUSICAB.900 and MUSICDG.900 and
from these a source has been reconstructed, 903_MUSIC.900.  MUSICAB
and MUSICDG differ in how they compute the duration of notes, MUSICDG
plays at half the speed of MUSICAB, otherwise they appear to be the
same.  A binary version was found in the Froggatt Pontefract
collection (tape "TUNES (VARIOUS)").  This is very similar to MUSICAB
and MUSICDG, the main difference being the TUNES version skips over
any initial text heading an input tape in

This is a program I remember encountering as a student, with the
Arrival of the Queen of Sheba, Wedding March and Flight of the Bumble
Bee tunes.  However these tapes when played out using MUSICAJH are
more out of tune.that I remember.

903_MUSIC is entered at 32 to read in and translate a tune written in
a textual notation.  This outputs a tape of pairs of integers
terminated by a negarive number.  Such tapes are then played by
entering at 33 whereupon the tape is read in and played out. On
completion another tape can be read in.

The integer pairs describe consecutive notes, each comprising a shift
count (i.e., pitch) and a loop count (i.e., duration).

The player loop is the same as that in TJF_MUSIC.

The pitch is written as a letter A-G possibly followed by one of more
^ symbols to raise the pitch by an octave, ' to sharpen the pitch by a
semitone or @ to flatten it.

The duration is an integer.  The input sequence is terminated by a
letter S.  Letter R can be used to output a short rest of about 1
msec.

The output consists of pairs of integers, representing S and abs(N)
for a similar loop to that in TJF_MUSIC.  Rests are encoded as a shift
of 900.

Internally the program has the following pitch table:

       Note Shift 
       A     110 
       A'    100
       B      90
       C      80
       C'     73
       D      66
       D'     58
       E      51
       F      45
       F'     40 
       G      36
       G'     31
       A^     27
       A'^    23
       B^     19 
       C^     16 
       C'^    13 
       D^     10 
       D'^     7
       E^      4
       F^      1

This is significantly different to TJF-MUSIC.


Sheba, Wedding March, Flight of the Bumble Bee
----------------------------------------------

These superficially seem to be tapes produced by "903_MUSIC" although
the range of notes is wider and there are some minor differences.

N.B. There were data errors in the original tapes which have been
corrected.

Combined, using the ANALYSIS program, the following pitch table has
been determined:

       Tapes Music
       150   ?? G-  F??  
       125   ?? G-' G??  
       115   A+5 
       102   A'+2 
        90   B 
        80   C 
        72   C'-1  
        66   D 
        58   D' 
        51   E 
        45   F 
        40   F' 
        36   G 
        31   G' 
        27   A^ 
        23   A'^ 
        19   B^ 
        16   C^ 
        13   C'^ 
        10   D^ 
         7   D'^ 
         4   E^ 
         2   F^+1 
         0   F^-1

Rests are encoded as a shift of 900.


MAESTRO 
=======

A note describing an improved version of MAESTRO gives the following
pitch table:


        Shift Note      Relative to Music       Length for 1sec duration
        245     C                                1390
        226     C'                               1560
        181     D                                1790
        160     D'                               1960
        141     E                                2170
        127     F                                2380
        115     F'      A+5                      2560
        104     G       A'+4                     2780
        92      G'      B+2                      3030
        81      A       C+1                      3330
        74      A'      C'+1                     3570
        67      B       D+1                      3850
        61      C^      D'+3                     4000
        51      C'^     E                        4540
        45      D^      F                        5000
        40      D'^     F'                       5260
        36      E^      G                        5560
        31      F^      G'                       5880
        27      F'^     A^                       6250
        23      G^      A'^                      6670
        19      G'^     B^                       7140
        16      A^      C^                       7700
        13      A'^     C'^                      8300
        10      B^      D'                       9090
        7       C^^     D'^                      9090
        4       C'^^    E^                      10000
        2       D^^     F^+1                    10000
        0       D'^^    F^-1                    11100

1000000/11100 = 90usec for loop with shift count 0 1000000/1390
=719usec for loop with shift count 245 but 245*3=735

Therefore play out can't be the same loop as MUSIC.

Note that for much of the range this is close to MUSIC.

Entertainer 
-----------

The notes used in The Entertainer are as follows:


        181     
        160
        141
        127
        115
        104
         81
         74
         67
         61
         45
         40
         36
         23
         16
         13
         10
          7
          2
          0

These are identically those from the "Note on MAESTRO" so we can
assume this is indeed from that table.

Using TRANSLATE to convert this tape to TJF notation produces a
version that plays well.


ALGOL Music 
===========

An Algol program to translate music from a textual to numerical
notation has been found (ALG_CREATE.ALG.900) together with a Algol
player with a code procedure containing the playout part
(ALG_PLAYER.ALG.900, ALG_PLAYER.SIR.900).  At first it was assumed the
translator was to prepare tunes for the player, but the accompanying
numerical music tapes didn't match so these are now assumed to
represent two distinct music systems.

Translator ----------

The input notation consists of strings such as 
A.   -- A 
AS.  -- A sharp 
BF.  -- B flap 
BBF. -- B flat one octave above BF.

        Shift Note      Relative to Music Length for 1sec duration
        222     C                        1389
        203     C'                       1515
        166     D                        1786
        150     D'                       1961
        137     E                        2174
        120     F                        2381
        120     F'                       2564
        100     G       A'               2778
         88     G'      B-2              3030
         79     A       C-1              3333
         70     A'      C'-3             3571
         63     B       D-2              3847
C        58     C^      D'               4000
         53     C'^     E+2              4543
         45     D^      F                5000
         40     D'^     F'               5263
         36     E^      G                5556
         30     F^      G^-1             5882
         26     F^'     A^-1             6250
         21     G^      A'^-2            6667
         18     G'^     B^-1             7143
         15     A^      C^-1             7692
         12     A'^     C'^-1            8333
          9     B^      D'-1             9091
          6     C^      D'^-1            9200
          4     C'^^    E^              10000
          2     D^^     F^+1            10000
          0     D'^^    F^-1            11100

Note that for much of the range this is close to MUSIC.

No player has been found for this translator.


Player 
------

This consists of an Algol program to read in a numeric tape and a SIR
procedure to play it out.  The tape starts with two integers, the
first is a count of the number of notes in the tune, the second is the
length of the unit beat in 0.1s.

The tune itself is encoded as pairs of integers, the first being a
shift count (i.e., pitch) and the second a duration in beats.

Two hand written notes suggest the following shifts comprise a scale:

28, 26, 24, 23, 21, 19, 17, 16 (or 15).  The fact that distance is 12
(i.e., the number of semitones in an octave) may be significant?

The player has a different loop to the other music programs in as much
as the shift instruction is /14 0 and the B register is loaded with
the necessary pitch shift, also 3 * 14 2047 instructions are included
in the loop fetching successive notes, unless

If the pitch shift is 0, the note is assumed to be a rest and is
played by a loop:

       14 1659
       14 1659 
       10 COUNT
        4 COUNT 
        9 ;-4.

If the pitch shift is 100, the note represents a musical slur and play
proceeds imemdiately to the next note without an intervening 3 * 14
2047 sequence.

ALG_OVER1.900 also includes notes 120 and 130 but this is thought to
be erroneous.


Herbert Music Program
=====================

My music program AJH_MUSIC was derived from TJF_MUSIC as follows:

1.  Code relating to the DAC output was been removed.

2.  A more exact approximation to 2^12 is used.

3.  The note H (A^) has been tuned to 440Hz using a digital tuner and
       the AJH_TUNEUP program.

4.  Rather than calculating the shift count for each note from it's
       nominal frequency a pre-calculated table of shifts is used.
       The shifts are calculated using timing information gained from
       the AJH_TUNEUP program.

This version produces a more tuneful output.

Note (1) my player plays TJF music input approximately one octave
lower then the TJF_MUSIC player.  There is a translation utility to
read in TJF_MUSIC scores and transpose then up by one octave.

Note (2) the highest note playable is V (on other mchines this may
vary depending on exact instruction timings).  W, X, Y and Z all play
as V.  Using symbols as [ \ ] ` { | _ and } are treated as playing a
"rest" - actually a very low frequency note.

Note (3) an additional feature is the notation &n where n is a decimal
digit.  This has the effect of slowing down the tempo of the player by
a factor 1.n.  For an example look at the translation of the TJF tune
"Jesu, Soul of Man's Desiring".

Note (4) an additional feature is the notation * to double the tempo
and / to halve it.  During playout the tempo can be double by a level
1 interrupt or halved by a level 2 or 3 interrupt.

The shift counts for the notes available are as follows:


        Note    Shift
        A        253 
        a        237 
        B        222 
        C        208 
        c        194 
        D        181 
        d        169 
        E        158 
        F        147 
        f        137 
        G        128 
        g        119 
        H        110 
        h        102 
        I         94 
        J         87 
        j         80 
        K         74 
        k         68 
        L         62 
        M         57 
        m         52 
        N         47 
        n         43 
        O         38 
        o         34 
        P         31 
        Q         27 
        q         24 
        R         20 
        r         17 
        S         15 
        T         12 
        t          9 
        U          7 
        u          5 
        V          3 
        v          1 

Note these are the shift counts, the calculated shift has +33 added to
these and the calculated shift is added to 13 8159 to calculate the
store shift instruction.

There is a utility program COMPACT for reading in music and punching
it out in the most compact form possible.

There is a utility program CALCULATE for calculating the table of
shifts from instruction timings determined using another utility
program called RETUNE.

Andrew Herbert 26 Jan 2014



       
